## The problem of contrastive focus

Analyzing focus interpretation in terms of a pragmatic rule connecting focus semantic values to semantic antecedents in prior discourse is incredibly fruitful. But now consider the following example:

{% include ex.html sent="What did people bring to the picinic?" sub="The [children]<sub>cf</sub> brought [unbridled enthusiasm]<sub>f</sub>." link="picnic" %} 

This response involves two focused elements. For both elements, it is easy enough to generate the requisite alternative sets, and the alternative set generated for the second focused element (marked with a subscripted *f*), is perfectly congruent with the preceding question. But a difficulty arises when we attempt to apply the felicity condition to the element labeled with *cf* (for *contrastive focus*). Its alternative set is distinctly not congruent with the preceding question, so we would expect the entire utterance to be marked as infelicitous.

Daniel Buring {% include ref.html id="buering2003" o="" e="" %} has offered a technique to locate the requisite antecedent.  Building on the notion of the question under discussion developed by Cragie Roberts {% include ref.html id="roberts1998" o="" e="," %} Buring posits the existence of a *discourse tree*, which imbues the state of information with additional structure. Each question governing the inqury is a node in the tree and is associated with an array of subquestions, complete answers to which constitute partial answers to the parent question. The idea is that the subquestions provide a *plan of inquiry* for addressing the parent question. The objective of the inquiry is to answer the top-most question in the tree. The plan for doing so is to answer each of the subquestions in turn. Felicitous use of contrastive focus, it is suggested, generates an alternative set that is congruent to a subquestion present within the discourse tree.

To make sense of the current case, in which contrastive focus is present in the absence of an explicit (sub)question, we must appeal to the ever present *implicit* question under discussion. All discourses, it would be maintained, whether questions have been explicitly introduced or not, are governed by a plan of inquiry, which records necessary subquestions whether they are actually uttered or not. 

This proposal is a natural extension of the question under discussion (QUD) representation of information states. But it is not without downside.  First, it seems to strain the notion of presupposition pretty heavily. Not only is there no direct representation to stand as antecedent to the generated focus semantic value, contrastive topic is quite resiliant to infelicity.  In [the picnic example](#picnic), many different subsets of the class of picnic goes could have substituted felicitously for "children", and it's hard to see how the information state could plausibly have all of these options ready to hand. The common response to this sort of worry is to appeal to accommodation. If the state does not contain the d-tree needed to provide the antecedent for the contrastive focus, then straightaway it comes about. This reliance on accommodation is not without its own set of issues, predominantly stemming from the unconstrained character of accommodation as a theoretical conjecture.
