

A primary role of focus is to divide the informational content of an utterance into that which is assumed to be part of the common ground and that which is newly contributed {% include ref.html id="jackendoff1972" o="n" %}. This effect of focus is brought out in the phenomenon of question answer congruence. While \Next[a] is an acceptable response to the posed question, \Next[b] is infelicitous.

\ex. Who likes Jane?
\a. JOHN likes Jane.
\b. \#John likes JANE.

The explanation of this pairing of questions with their appropriate responses is that focus serves to mark the new information provided by an utterance, and since Jane is introduced into the common ground by the question, focusing her in the response violates principles of cooperative communication.

An additional effect of focus is to mark contrast. A speaker can provide fuller information by contrasting a particular element of her utterance with potential alternatives she could have mentioned, and focus can be put into service to implement this contribution.  For instance, \Next[b] represents a plausible interpretation of the information conveyed by \Next[a], where the salient alternatives are determined by the extra-linguistic context.

\ex.\label{kiss}\a. John kissed MARY.
\b. John kissed Mary as opposed to the salient alternative recipients of his kiss.





 
The potential for an overly demanding processing burden is not a damning critique. However, a more serious issue arises when we attempt to explain the interaction between the semantic and pragmatic effects of focus within the alternative semantics framework. The means of capturing the relation between semantics and pragmatics that alternative semantics offers requires us to accept a radical account of the nature of semantic theories; one that must evoke interpretive effects that have no simple grounding in logical form.

The first thing to realize is that alternative semantics takes focus to be minimally realized at logical form. It is either a feature marker on a constituent (which I have modelled with capitalization) or in the formalization of \citeA{Rooth1992}, a function (\~X) located at the appropriate level (word, phrase, or sentence) of focus interpretation whose sole purpose is to implement a restriction on the focus-semantic value that is relevant to interpretation.\footnote{The function \~X does not \emph{determine} the restriction on the focus-semantic value. It simply places constraints on it. The determinate membership of the set utilized for interpretation is pragmatically assigned.}

Then, the question to ask is how this focus feature is implicated in the pragmatically generated focus related effects. \citeA[p.~100-1]{Glanzberg2005} compares the interaction of the focus element at LF with pragmatics to the interaction implicit in the theory of demonstratives. The demonstrative 'that' obtains its referent by means of a rule calling for the interpreter to pragmatically determine the demonstrated object. For Glanzberg, discourses are structured by a series of embedded topic questions. Since the semantic value of questions is taken to be a set of propositions, the felicity of a focus sensitive utterance is a matter of the restricted focus-semantic value being coextensive with the current discourse question. Glanzberg proposes that the pragmatic effects of focus are generated by a rule associated with the focus feature which calls for the interpreter to pragmatically determine the felicity of an utterance by comparing the focus semantic value to the discourse topic. This sort of mapping from the semantic feature at LF to a pragmatic inference is presumably similar to the rule posited for demonstratives. 

While the model of pragmatic interaction with the semantics is familiar, focus, understood as a minimally marked element at LF that contributes a set of alternatives, is not completely parallel to the case of demonstratives.
\begin{quotation}
\singlespace
There is no reason I know of to think focus features behave like variables in LF. I know of no reason to think they are bindable, and there is generally reason to doubt that features marking constituents are bindable, unless the constituents themselves are. Focus can occur on too wide a range of constituents to make this likely. Focus is a genuine aspect of LF, and triggers an interaction with context, but not of the sort Stanley [2000] assumes. On the pragmatic side, though I argued that we may think of the felicity condition as falling under the Gricean cooperative principle, it should still be noted that [it] is not much like a rule for pragmatically fixing the value of a variable. Even if Gricean, felicity constraints seem to be fundamentally different in effect. \cite[p.~101]{Glanzberg2005}
\end{quotation}

Someone who was already skeptical of the importance of locating the source of pragmatic effects within the semantics may be downright incredulous at this point. The mechanism by which the focus feature generates the pragmatic inferences is left completely mysterious. However, even if one is sympathetic to the idea that the semantic/pragmatic interface may allow for quite subtle interaction, the present approach has a further implausible consequence. Glanzberg maintains that there may be cases in which the pragmatic environment triggers a semantic interpretation.
\begin{quotation}
\singlespace
The mapping between focus semantics and pragmatics is not one of filling in meaning. In particular, it is not simply a matter of setting a value for the F-feature. Rather, a much more complex process, in which semantics and pragmatics interact, is triggered. First, the focus feature is used to derive a focus semantic value.... This is basically a semantic process.
The alternative set is then contextually restricted by the appropriate pragmatic process of domain restriction. This pragmatically restricted semantic value is then fed into a felicity condition.... This condition regulates the discourse (and I suggested, might itself follow from Gricean principles). It also triggers the pragmatic effects of question-answer congruence, contrast, and the appropriately weakened focal `presupposition'. But at the same time, this pragmatic condition can require particular focus placement, so in a way, the pragmatics can trigger the semantics. \citeyear[p.~106]{Glanzberg2005}
\end{quotation}

In effect, focus interpretation at times involves a procedure akin to free enrichment of semantic content by the pragmatics. One response to this observation, and the one which Glanzberg seems to prefer, is to maintain that focus has taught us something about semantic theory, and that the possibility of pragmatic intrusion ought to be embraced. But instead, we may maintain that we have here a reason to doubt the details of the proposed semantics/pragmatics relation. It requires pragmatic enrichment that has no recourse in LF, and this is problematic because it is tantamount to giving up on a finitely specifiable account of focus interpretation. The alternative semantics approach seems to give us the resources for providing a unified treatment of the various focus-related effects, but, if Glanzberg is right, it accomplishes the task by giving extra-linguistic features a central role in our meaning theory. And this is no minor addition. The work within the field of minimal semantics \cite<e.g.,>{Cappelen2005,Borg2004} emphazises that insofar as the purpose of semantic inquiry is to fulfill the goal put forward by Davidson, a minimal semantic core must be insullated from pragmatic intrusion.

Despite this failing, the value of the alternative semantics approach is two-fold. First, it seems clear that the (primary) function of focus is to evoke alternatives to the focused phrase; a serious account of focus should have the resources to bring these alternatives to bear in the interpretation of utterances involving focus. Second, in positing a focus semantic value at least partially independent from the ordinary semantic value, alternative semantics explicitly introduces a focus element into the semanticist's arsenal. In contrast to the event-based semantic account considered earlier, the unique interpretive effects of focus are not at risk of being lost. It is the goal of the remainder of this paper to provide an account within a more plausible framework for addressing the interaction between semantics and pragmatics. 
