### William James and the will to believe ### {#james}

In *The Will to Believe*, William James [-@james1896] drew a distinction between two independent and sometimes conflicting goals for those engaged in the pursuit of knowledge.  The first is to acquire true beliefs.  The second is to avoid believing falsehoods.  One could meet the goal of believing truths simply by believing everything, but doing so sacrifices entirely achieving the second goal.  And one could meet the goal of avoiding falsehoods by believing nothing at all, thereby forfeiting the virtue of believing truths. As James saw it, a strategy of inquiry that floats between these extremes is the path we ought to search for.

James famously argued that if one's belief choice is *live*, *momentous*, and *forced*, then the will to believe outstrips the fear of being wrong. But as a set of necessary requirements, this restricts speculative endeavors too much. Inquiry need not be momentous or forced for a jump to a conclusion to be fruitful.  James' model makes inquiry an optimization task between taking on too many falsehoods and leaving out too many truths.  And it is a task that is undertaken by fallible individuals in real time.  Such agents have limited access to information and limited resources to dedicate to the process of inquiry [@bratman1988]. Frequently, action is required when certainty cannot be obtained. And on many quotidian decision points, the risk of being incorrect is fairly low. It is *because* not every inquiry is momentous that striving for truth (and risking falsehood) is sometimes to be prefered. 

A preference for belief in the face of uncertainty is further supported by the fact that inquiries are packaged with corrective feedback mechanisms.  An important such mechanism is the build-and-test update procedure that inquiry exhibits. Inquiries are cummulatively built in a step by step process. One contributor to the inquiry adds a proposal to the mutual inquiry workspace at which point it can be played around with by all members of the inquiry before being ultimately accepted or rejected. Collaboration makes speculation worthwhile.

The success of this procedure depends heavily on a shared understanding of each party's role in the inquiry. An individual can only feel comfortable in proposing a speculative addition to the common ground if they believe that their collaborators will correct their contribution to the best of their ability.  And this requires interlocutors to be more than passive recipients of information.  They must use openings in the conversation to voice disapproval or uncertainty in addition to registering understanding and acceptance of what has been presented.

Disagreement is the tool by which interlocutors can check each other's flights of fancy.  And, I maintain, it is a tool we both know how to wield, and are prepared to let others weild against us.  The primary role of joint inquiry is to expedite what would be an extremely tedious task if attempted alone.  Even alone, the task can be sped up via judicious application of speculative intellectual leaps, though the risk involved cannot be wholly eliminated.  The collaborative facet of joint inquiry provides extra motivation for assuming the risk -- the cooperative interlocutor, to the extent she is able, will pull you back from the ledge by voicing her disagreement. 

David Lewis [-@Lewis1975b] spoke of language as a convention of truth and trust in a community.  His idea was that our shared language is supported by a tacit agreement to speak truthfully, and to trust that others will do so as well.  While the Jamesian model accepts the importance of speaking truthfully, it maintains that the convention may sometimes call for speaking rather than remaining silent even when truth cannot be guaranteed.  The importance of trust remains paramount, but it is not just the hearers' trust in the speaker to utter truly.  It is also the speaker's trust in his hearers to correct him when he doesn't.

### J. S. Mill ### {#mill}

John Stuart Mill's [-@mill1859] defense of liberty centrally relies on the corrective value of dispute. Even in the face of certainty regarding the answer to certain questions, dispute plays an important role. In successful inquiry, it is not enough that the participants in the inquiry come to accept truths about the world. The process of inquiry, when faithfully undertaken serves to provide its participants with justification for coming to accept the outputs of the process. Having gone through the inquiry is also necessary for the right to believe its outputs.

But this makes one's right to believe dependent upon the interlocutors with whom one interacts. Not only are asserters expected to be able to provide reasons for the propositions they propose, hearers are expected to challenge assertions when their content contradicts either their own expectations, or the shared conversational record. 

These commitments of cooperative exchange are realized in certain discourse mechanisms. The hearer has tools at her disposal for challenging assertion.  Primary among these is flat out denial, but often it is not maximally cooperative to flatly deny an assertion for this response has the effect of derailing the progress of the inquiry, and it is too sweeping in its effect.  Utterances involve a great number of parts, any of which may be subject to criticism, but criticizing one part may leave others unscathed.  Thus, hearers also have means for correcting utterances without issuing a blanket denial.

Mill's model of inquiry makes collaboration essential to the process. It is not just that individuals can make use of each other to acquire true beliefs about the world. Earning the right to those beliefs requires individuals to work together, and it foists commitments upon each party: speakers must be ready to defend their claims and hearer's must be prepared to correct claims when they can.

For Mill, it was essential to the justification of beliefs that they withstand continual attack from those who disagree with them. That is, for an individual to justifiably maintain a particular belief, they must be capable of defending that belief against attack from potential, reasonable dissenters. Even stronger, they must actually defend the belief against actual, reasonable dissenters. Marc Moffett (Moffett (2007)) has suggested that this criterion of individual justified belief is tantamount to what he calls the collective criticism condition, which demands "free and open critical discussion" of beliefs among epistemic peers who hold countervailing beliefs. We thus derive a principle of social epistemics from a principle of individual level justification of belief.

If the process of inquiry is what provides individual level belief justification, then the process of inquiry must make room for the collective criticism condition. It is my contention that natural discourse does just this. Not only are asserters expected to be able to provide reasons for the propositions they propose, hearers are expected to challenge assertions when their content contradicts either their own expectations, or the shared conversational record.

These commitments of cooperative exchange are realized in certain discourse mechanisms. The hearer has certain tools at her disposal for challenging assertion. Primary among these is flat out denial, but often it is not maximally cooperative to flatly deny an assertion for this response has the effect of derailing the progress of the inquiry, and it is too sweeping in its effect. Involve a great number of parts, any of which may be subject to criticism, but criticizing one part may leave others unscathed. Thus, hearers also have means for correcting utterances without issues a blanket denial.

This account of justification is an internalist one. Hearers must be aware of their commitment in securing justification for the speaker, and the speaker must be aware that the hearer is so aware in order to retain genuine warrant for her assertion. (Presumably, this mutual awareness could be iterated indefinitely.) The presence of this mutual awareness of each participant's role in generating justification suggests that not only does the hearer respond to the speaker's proposal, but also that the speaker's proposal will anticipate the hearer's response. Assertions represent, in addition to the content put forward, their anticipation of potential challenges to that content. Call this the corrective potential of an assertion.

The proposal here is that speaker and hearer contributions form a discourse pair, each of which both depends on and puts constraints on the other. A consequence of this model of discourse is that one can get insight into the deep structure of an utterance by looking to the nature of its discourse pair.

A well established application of this idea can be found in the alternative semantics for focus interpretation. It was found that focus placement in responses to questions easily predictable. And the semantic contribution of focus in an utterance matches that of the question to which the utterance is a fellicitous response.

### C. S. Peirce ### {#peirce}

For C. S. Peirce, scientific inquiry involved 3 distinct components, each of which provides a distinctive justification for the outputs of the process, and each of which is subject to a distinctive form of evaluation.  Given a proposed scientific inquiry, *abduction* generates a set of hypotheses which serve as potential answers to the issue. *Deduction* then generates necessary consequences of the hypotheses generated in the first phase. It is followed by phse of *induction* in which the hypotheses are tested by comparing their deductive commitments to the outputs of empirical investigation. Finally, a phase of *selective* abduction uses the results of the inductive phase to select the best hypothesis for whatever purposes such a selection is needed: further testing, belief updating, or being proclaimed as scientific fact.

Abduction, in both its creative and selective forms have been subject to severe criticism as logically governed elements of inquiry. Many philosophers of science have maintained that analysis of creative abduction, sometimes called the *context of discovery*, ought to be limited to investigating the psychology of scientists, and that selective abduction, or *inference to the best explanation*, is nothing more than a trivial extension of inductive reasoning. But Peirce^[Along with others. Cf. (CITE XXX).] maintained that abduction is a logically governed process in its own right, and that its application is subject to evaluation and criticism. 

If Peirce is right that these components each represent general processes of human reasoning, then we would suspect that inquiry generally manifests the same set of steps.  As an inquiry in its own right, discourse, too, should exhibit each of these components. Questions play a role parallel to creative abduction, supposition captures the function of deduction, and assertion is pretty clearly a selective process. But for the inductive phase, we need a means of submitting hypotheses to a testing process, and posits, along with their associated corrections, fill this role nicely.
