Timothy Williamson {% include appendices/ref.html id="williamson2000" o="" p="21-48" %} argues that knowledge is a state of mind. His primary concern is to defend the attribution of mentality against those who maintain that knowledge is factorizable into a narrow, belief-centric mental state and a wide, truth-based connection to the world. But in light of the inquiry-first perspective, it is relevant also to challenge his attribution of statehood. Inquiries evolve, and their self-referential proclivities require the entire evolution to be available to the inquirers. This suggests that the output of the process of inquiry is itself a dilated process. Thus, knowledge is a complex, mental process. 

This consequence is immediately worrisome. The most natural reading of knowledge ascribing sentences is that they reference the knowledge relation and their form reveals the structure of that relation. Since the canonical knowledge ascription has a sentential complement clause in the object position, it seems to follow that the object of knowledge has sentential form. It seems, further, to be a basic feature of knowledge ascriptions that they are *factive*, which is to say that they always embed truths in their complement clause. Putting all this together, a simple candidate to be the object of knowledge is any true proposition. Processes are not propositions; thus, the worry.

To the extent that knowledge ascriptions must embed truths[^factivity], all that is required is that the object of the referenced knowledge relation *determine* a truth. While processes are not themselves truth-apt, they are complexes that contain truth-apt element, and they can be *queried* at various stages of their development. To do so is to pull out a relevant slice of the process, culling the information it contains both in terms of time and in terms of its structural scope. The result of the query on an inquiry is an *information state*. According to the inquiry-first perspective, the function of knowledge ascriptions is to perform a query on an inquiry specifically for a truth it contains at a time.

Additionally, not all knowledge ascriptions are canonical. A variety of putative attributions of knowledge do not have, on their surface, sentential complement clauses, which indicates that they do not embed propositional objects.

<!-- Varieties of knowledge -->
{% include examples/ex2.html term="varieties of knowledge" type="sent" %}

Surface appearances aren't always the whole story; perhaps a proper filling out will include cameos by propositions lurking under the surface {% include appendices/ref.html id="stanley2001" o="n" e="." %} But sometimes the best guide to what there is is exactly what appearances tell us; in the case of knowledge ascriptions, examples such as [Varieties of knowledge](#varieties-of-knowledge) tell us that an individual's knowledge can subsume more than just propositional information {% include appendices/ref.html id="bengson2012a,grzankowski2012" o="n" e="." %}[^intellectualism]

The inquiry-first perspective on knowledge offers a pleasing account of this diversity amongst knowledge ascriptions. As we'll see in [Discourse as collaborative update](/chapters/discourse-as-collaborative-update.html), a plausible representation of inquiry at the logical level includes *discourse referents* as elements of the inquiry structure. It is possible to treat knowledge ascriptions in their *personal* guise as querying an inquiry for these objects. And the structural approach to inquiry provides a framework for similarly representing the entities (*ways*, or some other concept/property) needed as objects for knowledge ascriptions in their procedural guise.

In unifying the varieties of knowledge, treating them as different queries on the same process, we get pleasing explanation {% include appendices/ref.html id="kitcher1989" o="n" e="." %} Rather than positing distinct kinds of knowledge {% include appendices/ref.html id="grzankowski2012" o="n" e="," %} or risking loss by attempting to reduce one type of knowledge to another {% include appendices/ref.html id="sinhababu2015" o="n" e="," %} we are provided with a single object of knowledge that can accommodate the full variety of ways that such knowledge can be ascribed.

We also get to avoid contorting surface form of knowledge ascriptions in interpreting them.
  
<!-- Conjunctive knowledge -->
{% include examples/ex2.html term="conjunctive knowledge" type="sent" %}

The inquiry-first perspective on knowledge treats ascriptions such as that in [Conjunctive knowledge](#conjunctive-knowledge) as posing a conjunctive query on an inquiry for the subject. Since the inquiry is a single complex process containing both objectual and propositional elements, we need only make one call to the inquiry and have it return a single information state. This is directly represented in the surface form of the ascription. An approach that treats personal knowledge as a distinct relation from propositional knowledge must appeal to elided material in the deep structure of the conjunctive ascription. An approach that attempts to reduce personal knowledge to propositional knowledge has already given up the game of respecting surface structure, positing additional, unvoiced material even in atomic knowledge ascriptions.

[^factivity]: For a dissenting opinion, see {% include appendices/ref.html id="hazlett2012" o="n" e="." %}

[^intellectualism]: I focus here on *intellectualist* accounts of knowledge, setting aside explanations of non-canonical knowledge ascriptions that treat them as picking out a distinct kind of knowledge, one that characterizes some non-mental features of an individual, such as an *ability* they possess {% include appendices/ref.html id="ryle1949,lewis1988,bengson2012" o="n" e="." %}
