### Collaboration and discourse pairs

Discourse is an essentially collaborative process.[^Texts] At a superficial level, successful discourse requires that the participants accurately understand each others' contributions.  This requires constant feedback, step retracing, and repair to keep everyone on the same page.  But the importance of collaboration goes deeper than this.  Herb Clark and his contributors {% include appendices/ref.html id="clark1992" %} have documented a variety of discourse maneuvers in which individuals other than the interlocutor who initiates the contribution provide input essential to its completion. This has led Clark to suggest that discourse contribututions involve two distinct phases: the *initiation* and the *completion*. Crucially (and in general), responsibility for the two phases of contribution is distributed among the conversational participants.

[^Texts]: Here I turn my attention primarily to conversations held among multiple interlocutors in real time. Though I think many insights touched on in what follows apply also to individually composed texts, they admittedly demand extended discussion.

Clark is primarily concerned with the phonological and syntactic representation of discourse contribtutions, and with how the collaborative process determines the reference of individual words. But the same insights extend to the level of semantico-pragmatic representation as well. 

A principle way in which the collaborative nature of discourse is realized is in the way that assertion updates the state of information. Following Robert Stalnaker {% include appendices/ref.html id="stalnaker1987" e="," %} I understand the principle effect of assertion to be the elimination of uncertainty, which is modeled as the elimination of previously open possibilities from the information state. But Stalnaker also recognizes that there are two stages to the impact of an assertion. The first is an automatic update that takes place implicitly. It involves incorporating information into the common ground that includes things such as the fact that the speaker is speaking, a record of the salient objects that have been introduced to the context, and perhaps other forms of not-at-issue content of the utterance. The second stage of assertion involves an expansion of the state of information to incorporate the at-issue content of the utterance. Unlike the at first stage, this expansion does not take place automatically. Instead, the speaker's fellow interlocutors are given the power to either accept or reject the proposal before the context set is updated.[^MinimalUpdate] Thus, it is fitting to think of assertion as involving two distinct phases: an initiation, which involves the proposal of the asserted content by the speaker, and a completion, which involves either the acceptance or rejection of the asserted content by the hearer.

[^MinimalUpdate]: Even if rejected, the proposal is likely entered into the conversational record in some form for the purpose of anaphoric reference later on.

Collaboration is even more evident in the case of questions and answers. Questions can of course be accepted or rejected, but they also *call for* a particular form of response. That is, questions present an *issue*, which carries with it certain *felicity contitions* that acceptable responses must meet, and the question cannot be considered closed until a response meeting those conditions is proffered. 

An assertion combines with an acceptance or rejection and and a question combines with an answer to form what we can call a *discourse pair*. Each pair involves an ititiation (assertion or question) and a completion (acceptance/rejection or answer). The initiation phase presumes the possibility of a completion, and the completion depends upon the nature of the initiation. And, crucially, responsibility for the elements of the pair is distributed among the conversational participants.[^DistantCompletions]

[^DistantCompletions]: Interestingly, discourse initiations need not be immediately followed by their completions. A question may not be (fully) resolved until after a number of clarificatory amendments or sub-questions are introduced and resolved.

Discourse pairs thus exhibit a recognizable pattern. A contribution is an initiation if it presumes, or *anticipates* a completion, which is accomplished by means of exerting felicity conditions on adequate responses.[^Coherence] A contribution is a completion if its content depends on, or *responds to* an initiation from prior discourse.

[^Coherence]: Compare to the notion of discourse coherence in, for example, the work of Barbara Grosz and her collaborators {% include appendices/ref.html id="grosz1995" o="" e="." %}

The deeply collaborative nature of discourse suggests another shift in semantic attention, expanding on the idea of discourse dynamics, and treating discourse pairs as the primary units of semantic evaluation. The novelty to this proposed shift is that semantic evaluation must trespass not only the boundaries between sentences but also the borders of turns taken in the conversational exchange.[^TurnBoundaries]

[^TurnBoundaries]: A key consequence of this insight is a solution to some worries regarding the semantic interpretation of speech acts and embedding data.

I situate the formal implementation of my proposal within the class of theories known as *update semantics*. The key feature setting update semantics apart from classical, static semantics is that the semantic values of meaningful linguistic particles (or mental entities) are not worldly objects to which those particles *refer*. Instead, semantic values characterize the way in which a *state of information* is changed in response to a linguistic contribution.[^UpdateVsDynamics]

[^UpdateVsDynamics]: *Update* semantics further differ from merely *dynamic* semantics, in that states of information are built up with each new update as opposed to being erased and rewritten {% include appendices/ref.html id="groenendijk1991,dekker-pla" o="n" e="." %}

I follow Sarah Murray {% include appendices/ref.html id="murray2014" %} in proposing that updates fall into one of three broad categories based on the nature of the change they bring to the state of information. *Direct updates* alter the makeup of the state of information, principally by eliminating elements thereof; *structural updates* alter the relations holding between elements of the state of information, perhaps by instituing an ordering among them; and *dref updates* introduce a new element to the state of information, the principle purpose of which is to make them available for anaphoroic reference.

Posits involve both direct and structural updates. Understanding why this is requires making sense of their role within the context of a conjecture/correction pair. It also requires addressing two key properties of of the use of posits in discourse.

1. Posits have *disputative potential*. The use of a conjecture calls out for correction if an interlocutor can provide it. Corrections can address a wide variety of features of an utterance, and an account of the semantic value of posits must make these features available for potential correction. I account for this feature by making use of the fact that within an update theoretic model, individual utterances (or even portions theoreof) can contribute a multitude of independent updates to the state of information. Corrections can address any of these many updates without impugning the others.[^ManyUpdates]

[^ManyUpdates]: Since, in an update theoretic model, a semantic value need not be linked to a distinct worldly entity, sentences (or thoughts) can be semantically complete and meaningful without the need to conjecture some thing that the sentence (thought) picks out. Instead, semantic values of complex meaningful particles can be treated as complexes of semantic values, each of which changes the state of information in its own way, and sequentially.

2. Posits are *resiliant*. The use of a conjecture need not be completely withdrawn in the face of disagreement. Posits update the common ground, but they don't seem to carry the level of commitment that is generally associated with assertions. This property is captured in part by the previously noted fact that even when corrected, utterances make multiple updates that pass unscathed. But this doesn't fully capture the power of making posits over assertions. To account for this, I introduce the notion of a *default saturation* of property level updates.[^DiscoursePairs]

[^DiscoursePairs]: Also important to capturing conjecture resiliance is the idea that discourse pairs constitute the basic unit of semantic evaluation.
