## Generativity and usability

In his characterization of the constraints of language theorizing, Lewis presumes a criterion akin to Davidson's {% gloss learnability %} thesis, that a theory is out of the running if it cannot be given a finite specification {% cite davidson1967 %}. But this acceptance seems unmotivated given Lewis' characterization of the nature of the project:

> It should be obvious by now that my problem of radical interpretation is not any real-life task of finding out about Karl's beliefs, desires, and meanings. I am not really asking how *we* could determine these facts. Rather: how do *the facts* determine these facts? By what constraints, and to what extent, does the totality of physical facts about Karl determine what he believes, desires, and means? To speak of a mighty knower, who uses his knowledge of these constraints to advance from omniscience about the physical facts **P** to omniscience about the other facts determined thereby, is a way of dramatizing our problem.... The real-life knower has all the problems of our fictitious [omniscient] knower, and more besides: he does not have all of **P** to draw on, and he may be limited in endurance, intelligence, or memory.... But these further obstacles to his investigation are irrelevant to our real topic. {% cite lewis1974b | pages: pp. 333-4 | noname %}

Presumably, the reason for requiring that a language be at minimum finitely specifiable is that it is something that *people* possess, and people are at best finite, cognitive beings. But nature isn't a cognitive being at all, let alone a finite one. And there is no antecedent reason to think that the physical facts do determine the mental facts in a reductive way.[^bealer] To the extent that something like **Generativity** is a genuine constraint on theorizing about language, it suggests that the nature of the project isn't quite as Lewis characterizes it. It is a project of developing a theory *for* us not just a theory *of* us. And to provide this, we need to be more restrictive than to merely disallow infinitary definitions. We require a *usability* constraint.[^usability] An acceptable theory needn't say what the mechanisms are that carry out the operations of conversational exchange, but the operations ought to be specified in a way that it is plausible to think of human interlocutors making use of them in the course of conversation.[^frameproblem]

Lewis' appeal to the Generativity constraint belies the fact that one of the facts that is brought to bear in determining the meanings of our phrases is that people are *users* of language. Intentional systems are different from other physical systems in that the subject of our theorizing is involved in developing the system.

In this sense simplicity is more than just a theoretical virtue. It is a basic fact of the system we are studying that elements of it are rational. Rational agents use the tools at their disposal to perform necessary tasks in eficient ways. Social creatures use their cohort to offload some of the burden from their own processing units.

While there is a simple, transcendental argument speaking in favor of Davidson's constraint -- human's do possess a theory of language, and as cognitively finite individuals, they do not have infinite space to dedicate to language resources -- the usability constraint is more methodological.[^Bontly]
