Induction just is the correction of ampliative inference. It isn't the *self*-correcting so much as the correcting of the speculative daliances of abduction.

Or, what is special about induction is that it is ampliative and self-correcting. Whatever fits this model counts as inquiry-relevant.

van Fraassen: luck, courage, and technique

Courage is speculation
Luck is finding ourselves in a community of inquirers (a situation in which our tests tend to produce corrective results)
Technique is logic

> Given that traditional epistemology embodies false hopes never to be satisfied, we must try to find a different view of our epistemic condition, with new hopes and new dreams of its own. So here is our tragic protagonist, thrown into a world she never made, and she asks us: What does it take?

    We answer her: it takes luck, courage, and technique; but the greatest of these is luck. (van Fraassen 2000, p. 273)

> If our pursuit of knowledge, however broadly or feebly construed, is to be successful, we must be lucky-we have no way to constrain such fortune. This is the verdict on modern philosophy's misguided search for security. The history of Earth has seen great disasters that spelled the extinction of almost all life, including the dominant, best adapted among species. In each case, some forms of life happened to be suited to the radically and suddenly transformed circumstances -- thus evolution on Earth continued after all. See who was lucky and who was not! Look to those survivors, they weave not; neither do they spin; but fortune smiles on them. (van Fraassen 2000, p. 273)

**Idea:** There is no pure induction. Saying what would follow from a hypothesis were certain conditions to obtain is, perhaps probabilistic, deductive inference. Imagining hypotheses to put to this test is creative abduction. And selecting among hypotheses on the basis of tests is inference to the best explanation. Induction is nother other than the performance of tests and recording of results.

> It would be a great mistake to suppose that ideal experimentation can be performed without danger of error; but by the exercise of care and industry, this danger may be reduced indefinitely. In sensible experiementation, no care can always avoid error. The results of induction from sensible experimentation are to afford some ratio of frequency with which a given consequence follows given conditions in the existing order of experience. In induction from ideal experimentation, no particular order is forced upon us; and consequently no such numerical ratio is deducible. We are confined to a dichotomy: the result either is that some description of thing occurs or that it does not occur. (Peirce, The Nature of Mathematics, p. 147)

> The operation of testing a hypothesis by experiment, which consists in remarking that, if it is true, observations made under certain conditions ought to have certain results, and then causing those conditions to be fulfilled, and noting the results, and if they are favourable, extending a certain confidence to the hypothesis, I call *induction*. (Peirce, Abduction and Induction, p. 152)

> Characters are not units, nor do they consist of units, nor can they be counted, in such a sense that one count is right and another wrong. Characters have to be estimated according to their significance. The consequence is that there will be a certain element of guess-work in such an induction; so that I call it an *abductory induction*... It is an induction, because it is a test of the hypothesis by means of a prediction, which has been verified. But it is only an abductory induction, because it was a sampling of the characters of priests to see what proportion of them this man possessed, when characters cannot be counted, nor even weighed, except by guess-work. It also partakes of the nature of abduction in involving an original suggestion; while typical induction has no originality in it, but only tests a suggestion already made. (Peirce, Abduction and Induction, pp. 152-3)

> The relative probability of this or that arrangement of Nature is something which we should have a right to talk about if universes were as plenty as blackberries, if we could put a quantity of them in a bag, shake them up well, draw out a sample, and examine them to see what proportion of them had one arrangement and what proportion another. But, even in that case, a higher universe would contain us, in regard to whose arrangements the conception of probability could have no applicability.

   We have examined the problem proposed by the conceptualists, which, translated into clear language, is this: Given a synthetic conclusion; required to know out of all the possible states of things how many will accord, to any assigned extent, with this conclusion; and we have found that it is only an absurd attempt to reduce synthetic to analytic reason, and that no definite solution is possible.

   But there is another problem in connection with this subject. It is this: Given a certain state of things, required to know what proportion of all synthetic inferences relating to it will be true within a certain degree of approximation. Now, there is no difficulty about this problem (except for its mathematical complication); it has been much studied, and the answer is perfectly well known. And is not this, after all, what we want to know much rather than the other? Why should we want to know the probability that the fact will accord with our conclusion? That implies that we are interested in all possible worlds, and not merely the one in which we find ourselves placed. Why is it not much more to the purpose to know the probability that our conclusion will accord with the fact? One of these questions is the first above stated and the other the second, and I ask the reader whether, if people, instead of using the word probability without any clear apprehension of their own meaning, had always spoken of relative frequency, they could have failed to see that what they wanted was not to follow along the snthetic procedure with an analytic one, in order to find the probability of the conclusion; but, on the contrary, to begin with the fact at which the synthetic inference aims, and follow back to the facts it uses for premisses in order to see the probability of their being such as will yield the truth. (Peirce, The Probability of Induction, pp. 184-5)
